##front [BBC TV Film Leader]
L5-cue_0b
##front Credits: Cornell University U.S.A., The Character of Physical Law, Professor Richard Feynman gives the Messenger Lectures
L5-cue_0
##Title The Distinction of Past and Future
L5-cue_2
#Now, it’s obvious to everybody that the phenomena
L5-cue_3
of the world are evidently irreversible.
L5-cue_4
By that I mean things happen that don’t happen the other way: you drop a cup and it breaks,
L5-cue_5
and you can sit there a long time waiting for the pieces
L5-cue_6
to come together and come back into your hand.
L5-cue_7
If you watch the waves breaking at the sea, you stand there and wait for the great moment
L5-cue_8
when the foam collects together, rises up out of the sea, and falls back further
L5-cue_9
out from the shore—it would be very pretty.
L5-cue_10
#As a matter of fact, the demonstration of this in such lectures is usually made
L5-cue_11
by having a section of moving picture, in which you take a number of phenomena,
L5-cue_12
and running the thing backwards, and then see all the laughter—the laughter just means this
L5-cue_13
ain’t gonna happen in the real world.
L5-cue_14
#But actually, that’s a kind of a weak way to put something which is so obvious and deep
L5-cue_15
as the difference between the past and the future.
L5-cue_16
Because even without an experiment,
L5-cue_17
our very experiences inside are completely different from past and future.
L5-cue_18
We remember the past; we don’t remember the future.
L5-cue_19
We have a different kind of awareness about what might happen than we have
L5-cue_20
of what most likely has happened.
L5-cue_21
The past and future look completely different psychologically, [as do] the questions
L5-cue_22
of memory, of apparent freedom of will, in the sense that we feel that we can do something
L5-cue_23
to affect the future—but none of us, or very few of us,
L5-cue_24
believe that there’s anything you can do to affect the past.
L5-cue_25
#Remorse, and regret, and hope are all words
L5-cue_26
which distinguish perfectly obviously the past and the future.
L5-cue_27
Now, if the world of nature is made of atoms (and we, too,
L5-cue_28
are made of atoms that obey physical laws)—this obvious distinction between what happens
L5-cue_29
in the past and the future, and this obvious irreversibility
L5-cue_30
of all phenomena—you would think the most likely and obvious interpretation is
L5-cue_31
that some laws—some of the motion laws of the atoms—are going one way,
L5-cue_32
that the atom laws are not such that they can go either way, that there’s somewhere
L5-cue_33
in the works some kind of a principle that ooksels only make wooksels,
L5-cue_34
and never vice versa, and so the world is turning from ooksely character
L5-cue_35
to wooksely character all the time, and that this one—way business of the interactions
L5-cue_36
of things is the thing that makes the whole phenomena of the world seem to go one way.
L5-cue_37
#Yet we haven’t found it yet.
L5-cue_38
That is, in all the laws of physics that we’ve found so far, there doesn’t seem
L5-cue_39
to be any distinction of the past and the future,
L5-cue_40
that the moving pictures should work the same way going both ways, and the physicist who looks
L5-cue_41
at it should not laugh—details now to be explained.
L5-cue_42
#Let us take the law of gravitation as our standard example.
L5-cue_43
If I have a sun, and a planet that I started off in some direction going around to here,
L5-cue_44
and then take a moving picture of this—say it gets to here.
L5-cue_45
Now, take a moving picture of this backwards—take a moving picture of it,
L5-cue_46
excuse me, and run the movie backwards—and look at it.
L5-cue_47
What happens?
L5-cue_48
#The planet goes around the sun in an ellipse.
L5-cue_49
The speed of—this way, of course: starts here, goes to here, keeps on going around;
L5-cue_50
goes in an ellipse—the speed of the planet is such that the area swept
L5-cue_51
out by the radius is always the same in equal time.
L5-cue_52
[It] just does exactly the way it ought to do, perfectly satisfactory;
L5-cue_53
it cannot be distinguished from the one going the other way.
L5-cue_54
So the law of gravitation is of such a kind that it doesn’t make any difference
L5-cue_55
if you show the phenomenon running—any phenomenon involving just gravitation—running
L5-cue_56
backwards on a film, it’ll look perfectly satisfactory.
L5-cue_57
#Put it precisely more this way: if at a given instance the particle moving this way—if all the
L5-cue_58
particles in a more complicated situation—would have every one
L5-cue_59
of their speeds reversed suddenly, then the thing will just unwind through all
L5-cue_60
of the things that it wound up into.
L5-cue_61
That is, if you have a lot of particles doing this, then you suddenly reverse the speeds,
L5-cue_62
they will completely undo what they did before.
L5-cue_63
#Now, this is in the laws of gravitation, which say now the velocity changes as a result
L5-cue_64
of the forces, and so on; if I reverse the time, the forces are not changed, and so the changes
L5-cue_65
in velocity are not altered at corresponding distances.
L5-cue_66
And so each velocity then has its succession of alterations made in exactly the reverse way
L5-cue_67
that they were made when this went out before, and it’s easy to prove that the law
L5-cue_68
of gravitation is time reversible.
L5-cue_69
#The law of electricity and magnetism: time reversible.
L5-cue_70
The laws of nuclear interaction: time reversible—as far as we can tell.
L5-cue_71
The laws of beta decay that we talked about at a previous time: also time reversible;
L5-cue_72
the difficulty of the experiments of a few months ago,
L5-cue_73
which indicate that there’s something the matter with—there’s some unknown about—the law,
L5-cue_74
suggests the possibility that, in fact, it may not be also time reversible, but we shall see.
L5-cue_75
#But at least the following is true: this beta decay that we’re talking about,
L5-cue_76
which may not be time reversible (but I don’t know), is a very unimportant phenomenon
L5-cue_77
for most ordinary circumstances: the possibility of my talking to you does not depend
L5-cue_78
on that happening; it does depend on chemical interactions; it depends on electrical forces;
L5-cue_79
it doesn’t actually depend much on nuclear forces at the moment,
L5-cue_80
but it depends also on gravitation.
L5-cue_81
#But, I am one-sided: I speak, and the voice goes out into the air
L5-cue_82
and doesn’t come sucking back into my mouth when I open it.
L5-cue_83
This irreversibility cannot be hung on the phenomena of beta decay.
L5-cue_84
In other words, we believe that there are, in the world, most of the ordinary phenomena
L5-cue_85
which are produced by atomic motions, which are according to laws
L5-cue_86
which can be completely reversed.
L5-cue_87
#So we have to look some more to find the explanation.
L5-cue_88
If we look at this more carefully, and planets moving around the sun more carefully,
L5-cue_89
you’ll soon find that it isn’t quite right: for example, the earth’s rotation
L5-cue_90
on its axis is slightly slowing down—that’s due to tidal friction.
L5-cue_91
You’ll see that friction is something which is obviously irreversible:
L5-cue_92
if I took a heavy weight [block] on the [wood] floor, here, and pushed it, it would slide
L5-cue_93
and stop; if I stand and wait for it, it doesn’t suddenly start up
L5-cue_94
and speed up and come into my hand.
L5-cue_95
So a frictional effect seems to be irreversible.
L5-cue_96
#But a frictional effect, as we discussed at another time,
L5-cue_97
is the result of enormous complexity of the interactions of the block with the wood,
L5-cue_98
the jiggling of the atoms inside.
L5-cue_99
That the organized motion of the wood—[I mean,] of the block—is changed into disorganized,
L5-cue_100
irregular wiggle—waggles of the atoms in the wood.
L5-cue_101
So that, therefore, we should look at the thing more closely.
L5-cue_102
#As a matter of fact, we have here the clue to the apparent irreversibility.
L5-cue_103
I take a simple example of—for example, if we have blue water, say ink, and white water,
L5-cue_104
that’s water without ink, in a tank, with a little separation,
L5-cue_105
and pull out the separation very delicately, then it starts out separate—blue
L5-cue_106
on one side, white on the other side.
L5-cue_107
#Wait a while.
L5-cue_108
Gradually the blue mixes up with the white, and after a while the water is "lukeblue": I mean,
L5-cue_109
it’s sort of 50/50 color, uniformly distributed throughout.
L5-cue_110
Now if we wait long, for a long time,
L5-cue_111
and watch this for a long time, it does not by itself separate.
L5-cue_112
Oh, you can do something—you can get the blue separated again—you can evaporate the water
L5-cue_113
and condense it somewhere else and collect the blue dye and dissolve it in half the water
L5-cue_114
and put back this thing, and so on.
L5-cue_115
#While you’re doing all that, however,
L5-cue_116
you yourself are causing irreversible phenomena somewhere else.
L5-cue_117
So by itself it doesn’t go the other way—and that gives us some clue.
L5-cue_118
#Let’s look at the molecule.
L5-cue_119
Suppose that we took a moving picture of the water—of the blue and the white water mixing:
L5-cue_120
it would look funny if we ran it backwards, because we start with uniform water,
L5-cue_121
and gradually the thing would separate, and would be obviously nutty.
L5-cue_122
Now, we magnify the picture so that every physicist can watch, atom by atom,
L5-cue_123
to find out what happened irreversibly—where the laws of balance
L5-cue_124
of forward and backward broke down.
L5-cue_125
#You start, and you look at the picture, and you have blue atoms (that’s ridiculous,
L5-cue_126
but we’ll call it that)—we have atoms of one kind and atoms
L5-cue_127
of another kind jiggling all the time, in thermal motion, wiggling and bouncing.
L5-cue_128
If we were to start at the beginning, we would have mostly atoms of one kind on one side,
L5-cue_129
and atoms of the other kind on the other side.
L5-cue_130
#Now, these atoms are jiggling around—that’s too small a box;
L5-cue_131
you need more to get this effect—billions and billions of these atoms.
L5-cue_132
Now, these atoms are jiggling around—I just put one more but I’m getting tired of making these.
L5-cue_133
These atoms are jiggling around, and if we start all on one side and all on the other, we see,
L5-cue_134
of course, that in their perpetual irregular motions,
L5-cue_135
they’ll get mixed up—and that’s why it gets to be more or less uniformly blue.
L5-cue_136
But let’s watch any one collision.
L5-cue_137
#Here’s a particular collision selected from that picture:
L5-cue_138
here’s this molecule moving this way, and this one moving this way.
L5-cue_139
They come together, say, in the moving picture, and they bounce off this way.
L5-cue_140
Now you run that section of the film backwards, and you find a pair
L5-cue_141
of molecules moving this way, bouncing off that way, and the physicist looks with his keen eye
L5-cue_142
and measures everything and says, "That’s all right; that’s according to the laws of physics:
L5-cue_143
if two molecules came this way, they would bounce that way,
L5-cue_144
and if they came that way, they would bounce this way.
L5-cue_145
It’s reversible—the laws of molecular collision are reversible."
L5-cue_146
#If you watch too carefully, you can’t understand it at all,
L5-cue_147
because every one of the collisions is absolutely reversible,
L5-cue_148
and yet the whole moving picture shows something absurd,
L5-cue_149
which is that the molecules start—in the reverse picture, the molecules start
L5-cue_150
in this condition—blue, white, blue, white, and blue, white, and so on, all mixed up,
L5-cue_151
and yet as time goes on, through all the collisions, the blue separates
L5-cue_152
from the white—they can’t do that!
L5-cue_153
#That’s not natural, that the accidents of life will be
L5-cue_154
such that the blues will separate themselves from the whites,
L5-cue_155
yet if you watch it move—this reverse movie—very carefully, every collision is okay.
L5-cue_156
Well, you see that’s all there is to it, that the irreversibility is caused
L5-cue_157
by the general accidents of life: that if you start with a thing that’s separated like this,
L5-cue_158
and just make irregular changes, it gets more uniform,
L5-cue_159
but if you start with something that’s uniform,
L5-cue_160
and make irregular changes, it doesn’t get separated.
L5-cue_161
It could get separated; it’s not against the laws of physics that these things bounce
L5-cue_162
around so that they separate; it’s just unlikely.
L5-cue_163
It just—it would never happen in a million years!—and that’s the answer.
L5-cue_164
#The things are irreversible only in the sense that going one way is likely to go,
L5-cue_165
but going the other way, although is possible and is according to the laws of physics,
L5-cue_166
wouldn’t happen in a million years.
L5-cue_167
It’s just ridiculous to expect that if you sit there long enough,
L5-cue_168
the jiggling of the atoms will separate a mixture, a uniform mixture,
L5-cue_169
of ink and water into ink on one side, and water on the other.
L5-cue_170
#Now, if I had put a box around here so that this was all the molecules that there were,
L5-cue_171
as time went on they would get mixed up.
L5-cue_172
But if you’re patient, I think you could believe that in the perpetual, irregular collisions
L5-cue_173
of these molecules, after some time (not necessarily a million years, maybe only a year),
L5-cue_174
if you keep watching, accidentally they get back more or less like this—in the sense, at least;
L5-cue_175
they get back far enough to say that if I drew a line through, all the whites on one side
L5-cue_176
and all the blues on the other—it’s not impossible.
L5-cue_177
However, the actual objects with which we work have not only four or five blues and whites,
L5-cue_178
but they have four or five million, million, million, million atoms.
L5-cue_179
And it’s just not likely that four or five million, million, million,
L5-cue_180
million are all going to get separated like this.
L5-cue_181
#So the apparent irreversibly of nature does not come from the irreversibility
L5-cue_182
of the fundamental physical laws; it comes from the characteristic that if we start
L5-cue_183
with an ordered system and have the irregularities
L5-cue_184
of nature bouncing, then the thing goes one way.
L5-cue_185
#Therefore, the next question is how did it get ordered in the first place?
L5-cue_186
That is to say, why is it possible to start with the order?
L5-cue_187
Because, you see, the difficulty is that we start with an ordered thing;
L5-cue_188
we don’t end with an ordered thing.
L5-cue_189
One of the rules of the world is that the conditions at the beginning—I mean,
L5-cue_190
that the thing goes from an ordered condition to a disordered [one].
L5-cue_191
#(Incidentally, this word order, and disorder, is another one of those terms of physics
L5-cue_192
which aren’t exactly the same as it is in ordinary life: the order need not be interesting
L5-cue_193
to you human beings; it’s just a question that there’s a definite situation—they’re all
L5-cue_194
on one side and all on the other, or they’re mixed up—that’s the order to disorder.
L5-cue_195
Maybe you like it better mixed up, but that’s not more ordered, anyhow.)
L5-cue_196
#Now...
L5-cue_197
...the question is, then, how does the thing in the first place get ordered, and why,
L5-cue_198
when we look at any ordinary situation which is only partly ordered,
L5-cue_199
we can conclude that it probably came from more ordered.
L5-cue_200
If I look at a tank of water in which it’s very dark blue on this side,
L5-cue_201
and very clear white water here, and sort of bluish water in between,
L5-cue_202
and I know that that thing has been left alone for 20, 30 minutes,
L5-cue_203
then I will guess that it got this way because it was bluer before—for instance,
L5-cue_204
if I find—I mean, that the separation was more complete in the past.
L5-cue_205
If I find, for example, two objects—well, this is as good an example as any.
L5-cue_206
If I wait longer, then the blue and white would get more intermixed.
L5-cue_207
If I know that this thing has been left alone for a sufficiently long time,
L5-cue_208
I can conclude something about the past condition: the fact that it’s smooth
L5-cue_209
in here could only arise because it was much "better"
L5-cue_210
in the past—much more satisfactorily separated—because
L5-cue_211
if it weren’t more satisfactorily separated in the past,
L5-cue_212
in the time since then it would have gotten more mixed up than it is.
L5-cue_213
#It is therefore possible to tell from the present something about the past,
L5-cue_214
although physicists really do not do this much: physicists usually like to think
L5-cue_215
that all you have to do is say, "These are the conditions, and what happens next?"
L5-cue_216
But all our sister sciences have a completely different problem; in fact, all the other things
L5-cue_217
that are studied—history, geology, and astronomical history—all have a problem
L5-cue_218
of this kind: I find they’re able to make predictions
L5-cue_219
of a completely different type than a physicist.
L5-cue_220
#A physicist says, "In this condition, I’ll tell you what’ll happen next."
L5-cue_221
But a geologist will say something like this: "I have dug in the ground,
L5-cue_222
and I’ve found certain kinds of bones.
L5-cue_223
I predict that if you dig in the ground you’ll find a similar kind of bone."
L5-cue_224
A historian, although he talks about the past, can do it by talking about the future:
L5-cue_225
when he says, "Napoleon exists," or "Napoleon was"—or that the French Revolution was in 1783,
L5-cue_226
he means that if you look in another book about this French Revolution,
L5-cue_227
you’ll find that same date—1789, maybe.
L5-cue_228
(That’s pretty accurate for a physicist—to have the third decimal, to three figures.)
L5-cue_229
#Now, the thing that he says is, he makes a kind of prediction
L5-cue_230
about something he has never looked at before—documents that have still to be found.
L5-cue_231
He predicts that the documents, if there’s something written about Napoleon,
L5-cue_232
will coincide with what is written in the other document.
L5-cue_233
The question is how that’s possible.
L5-cue_234
#The only way that that’s possible is to suggest that the past
L5-cue_235
of the world was more organized in this sense than the present.
L5-cue_236
Some people have proposed at one time (the physicists only have proposed this,
L5-cue_237
some of the physicists) that the way it got ordered was this:
L5-cue_238
that the whole universe is just irregular motions like this,
L5-cue_239
and that if you see-if you wait long enough with five atoms,
L5-cue_240
of course it can get separated accidentally.
L5-cue_241
#All that has happened is that in the world has been going on and going on and going on
L5-cue_242
and going on and going on, and it fluctuated—that’s what this is called,
L5-cue_243
when it gets a little bit out of ordinary—it fluctuated,
L5-cue_244
and now we’re watching the fluctuation undo itself again.
L5-cue_245
#How do we know that isn’t the case?
L5-cue_246
You say, "Well, how long you would have to wait?"
L5-cue_247
I know, but if it didn’t fluctuate far enough to be able to produce evolution,
L5-cue_248
to be able to produce an intelligent person, we wouldn’t have noticed it—so we had
L5-cue_249
to keep waiting until we were alive to notice it—so we have
L5-cue_250
to have at least that big a fluctuation.
L5-cue_251
#But this thing-this is incorrect, I believe;
L5-cue_252
I think that’s a ridiculous theory for the following reason.
L5-cue_253
That if the world were much bigger, and there were atoms all over the place,
L5-cue_254
and they started from a completely mixed-up condition—all over—and I happen only to look
L5-cue_255
at the atoms here, and I find that the atoms here are separated, I have no way to conclude
L5-cue_256
that the atoms anywhere else are separated.
L5-cue_257
#In fact, if the thing were a fluctuation, and I noticed something odd, the most likely way
L5-cue_258
that it got there is if there’s nothing odd anywhere else.
L5-cue_259
That is, I have to "borrow odds," so to speak, to get this lopsided,
L5-cue_260
and there’s no use on borrowing too much.
L5-cue_261
It’s much more likely of all the possible ways in which these six atoms can be on one side
L5-cue_262
and these seven on the other side of all the possibilities, the most likely condition
L5-cue_263
of the rest of the world is mixed up.
L5-cue_264
#Therefore, an astronomer, looking at a star that he’s never—although, when we look at the stars
L5-cue_265
and we look at the world, we see it’s ordered, there could be a fluctuation,
L5-cue_266
the prediction would be that if we’d look at a place that we haven’t looked at before,
L5-cue_267
it’ll be disordered, and a mess—that the separation of the matter into stars
L5-cue_268
which are hot, and space which is cold, which we’ve seen—although,
L5-cue_269
if you say it could be a fluctuation, then in places that we haven’t looked we would expect
L5-cue_270
that the stars are not separated from the space, since every time we make a prediction
L5-cue_271
that in a place that we haven’t looked, we’ll see the same statement
L5-cue_272
about Napoleon—we’ll see stars in a similar condition—we’ll see bones
L5-cue_273
like the bones that we’ve seen before.
L5-cue_274
#The success of all those sciences indicate that the world did not come from a fluctuation
L5-cue_275
but came from a condition which was more separated,
L5-cue_276
more organized in the past than at the present time.
L5-cue_277
#Therefore, I think it’s necessary that to add to the physical laws the hypothesis
L5-cue_278
that in the past the universe was more ordered,
L5-cue_279
in a technical sense—less mixed up—than it is today,
L5-cue_280
that this statement is the added statement that’s needed to make sense,
L5-cue_281
and to make an understanding of the irreversibility.
L5-cue_282
That statement, of course, is itself lopsided in time.
L5-cue_283
It says something about the past is different than the future, but it comes outside
L5-cue_284
of the province of what we ordinarily call physical laws, because we try, today,
L5-cue_285
to distinguish (maybe someday we won’t do that, but we do, today, distinguish) between the laws
L5-cue_286
which tell how something moves if you start it in a certain way, and those statements
L5-cue_287
about how the universe got the way it gets, or has been, what it was in the past,
L5-cue_288
and what it’s going to get to be—no, excuse me: the statement of the physical laws
L5-cue_289
which govern the rules by which the universe develops, and the law which states the condition
L5-cue_290
that the world was in the past, that’s considered to be astronomical history.
L5-cue_291
Perhaps someday that will also be a part of physical law.
L5-cue_292
#Now, there are a number of interesting features of irreversibility
L5-cue_293
that I think I would like to illustrate.
L5-cue_294
One of them is to see how exactly an irreversible machine really works.
L5-cue_295
Suppose that we built something that we know ought to work only one way.
L5-cue_296
What I’m going to build is a wheel with a ratchet on it.
L5-cue_297
A ratchet means just this—that we have a notched wheel with steps.
L5-cue_298
(I’ve drawn the wrong way for what I’m used to thinking about it.
L5-cue_299
No, I had it right, because this way there’s another notch—a sawtooth wheel like this,
L5-cue_300
with sharp up notches and relatively slow down notches, all the way around.)
L5-cue_301
#And then—this is a wheel on a shaft—then on this thing there’s a little piece of pawl,
L5-cue_302
a thing called a pawl, which is on a pivot here, and which is held down by a spring.
L5-cue_303
(It gets in the way of the wheel, but that’s a small technical difficulty:
L5-cue_304
this is two-dimensional, and actually it’s set a little bit below.)
L5-cue_305
Now, this wheel can only turn one way.
L5-cue_306
If you try to turn it this way, then these straight—edged parts of the teeth get jammed
L5-cue_307
against the pawl, and it doesn’t go—whereas if you turn it the other way,
L5-cue_308
it would just go right over the thing and—snap, snap, snap, pop, pop, pop—ping.
L5-cue_309
#[This is why] they use them in clocks, so when you wind watches, they have this kind
L5-cue_310
of a thing inside so that you can only wind it one way,
L5-cue_311
and after you’ve wound it, it holds a spring.
L5-cue_312
#Now, we want to discuss—you see, it’s completely irreversible in the sense
L5-cue_313
that the wheel can only turn one way.
L5-cue_314
Now, this irreversible machine—this wheel that can only turn one way—has been imagined
L5-cue_315
that you could use it for a very useful thing, say, a very interesting thing:
L5-cue_316
because of molecular irregularities—because of molecular motion,
L5-cue_317
perpetual motion—there’s a perpetual motion of molecules.
L5-cue_318
#And if you build a very delicate instrument, it will always jiggle,
L5-cue_319
because it’s being bombarded irregularly by the air molecules in the neighborhood.
L5-cue_320
So, that’s very clever; we’ll connect this with a shaft, which is hard to illustrate
L5-cue_321
in three dimensions; it goes way out here.
L5-cue_322
You connect this to it with a shaft, with a vane,
L5-cue_323
with a set—the wheel has four vanes (actually,
L5-cue_324
my angles and things have gotten a little bit mixed up:
L5-cue_325
look down on the shaft—this thing’s got four vanes like this.)
L5-cue_326
Those are bombarded—they’re in a box of gas here, and they’re bombarded all the time
L5-cue_327
by the molecules, irregularly, so the thing is pushed sometimes one way,
L5-cue_328
sometimes the other way.
L5-cue_329
#[Now,] when it’s pushed one way, this thing gets jammed,
L5-cue_330
but when it’s pushed the other way, it goes around.
L5-cue_331
So we find the wheel perpetually going around, and we have a kind of perpetual motion.
L5-cue_332
That’s because this wheel is irreversible—but actually, we have to look into the details.
L5-cue_333
The way this works is that when the wheel goes one way, it lifts the pawl up
L5-cue_334
and then the pawl snaps down against the next tooth—and it will bounce,
L5-cue_335
if it’s perfectly elastic; it will go bounce, bounce, bounce, bounce, all the time.
L5-cue_336
#The wheel could just go down around the other way when the pawl accidentally bounces up!
L5-cue_337
This will not work unless it’s true that when the pawl comes down it sticks, or stops,
L5-cue_338
or bounces, and cuts out: if it bounces and cuts out,
L5-cue_339
there must be what we call damping, or friction, again.
L5-cue_340
And in the falling down and bouncing
L5-cue_341
and stopping (which is the only way this will work one way),
L5-cue_342
heat is generated by the friction: this part of the wheel,
L5-cue_343
over here, will get hotter and hotter.
L5-cue_344
#However, when it begins to get quite warm, something else happens:
L5-cue_345
just as there’s Brownian motion, or irregular motions in the gas here; so,
L5-cue_346
whatever this is made out of—the parts that this is made
L5-cue_347
out of—are getting hotter, and are becoming more irregular.
L5-cue_348
So a time comes when this is hot enough, that the pawl is simply jiggling
L5-cue_349
because of the molecular motions of the things on the inside.
L5-cue_350
And so it bounces up and down on here because of molecular motion—the same thing
L5-cue_351
that was making this vane turn around—and in bouncing up and down on here,
L5-cue_352
it is up as much as it is down; when it is up as much as it is down, a tooth can go either way.
L5-cue_353
#As a matter of fact, the thing will be driven backwards: if this one was hot
L5-cue_354
and this one was cold, the wheel
L5-cue_355
that you thought would go only one way would go the other way, because: in the terrible bouncing
L5-cue_356
up and down on this wheel, every time it comes down it comes
L5-cue_357
down on an incline plane—and so it pushes the wheel this way.
L5-cue_358
Then it bounces up again, comes down another incline plane,
L5-cue_359
and so on-and so if this side is hotter than this side, it’ll go around this way.
L5-cue_360
#What’s it got to do with the temperature of this side—suppose they didn’t have that at all?
L5-cue_361
Oh: then, if it’s pushed forward by falling on an incline plane,
L5-cue_362
the next thing that will happen is,
L5-cue_363
it will bounce against that tooth, and the wheel will bounce back.
L5-cue_364
But in order to prevent the wheel from bouncing back, we put a damper on it:
L5-cue_365
we put vanes in the air, so that it can’t go.
L5-cue_366
Then it can only- it will go one way, but the wrong way,
L5-cue_367
and so it turns out that no matter how you design it, a wheel like this will go the one way
L5-cue_368
if this side is hotter, and go the other way if this side is hotter.
L5-cue_369
#But after there’s a heat exchange between the two, and everything has calmed down,
L5-cue_370
it will neither go one way or the other—that’s the technical way in which the phenomena
L5-cue_371
of nature will go one way as long as they’re out of equilibrium, as long as one side is quieter
L5-cue_372
than the other, or one side is bluer than the other.
L5-cue_373
The conservation of energy would let us think that we have as much energy
L5-cue_374
as we want—nature never loses or gains energy.
L5-cue_375
Yet the energy of the sea, for example—the thermal motion of all the atoms
L5-cue_376
in the sea—is practically unavailable to us: in order to get that energy organized—herded, used,
L5-cue_377
make it useful, make it available for use—we have
L5-cue_378
to have some place that’s at a different temperature.
L5-cue_379
We have to use a difference in temperature, or else we’ll find
L5-cue_380
that although the energy is there, we cannot make use of it.
L5-cue_381
There’s a great difference between energy and availability of energy.
L5-cue_382
#The energy of the sea, for example, is a large amount, but it’s not available to us.
L5-cue_383
I think I can give an analogy, or give some idea of what the difficulty is, this way:
L5-cue_384
the conservation of energy means that the total energy in the world is kept the same—but
L5-cue_385
in the irregular jiggling, that energy can be spread about so uniformly
L5-cue_386
that there’s no (in certain circumstances) there’s no way to make more go one way
L5-cue_387
than the other; there’s no way to control it anymore.
L5-cue_388
I don’t know if you’ve ever had this experience, but I have had, going to the beach with several,
L5-cue_389
many towels, and so on, and sitting happily
L5-cue_390
on the beach-and having a tremendous downpour suddenly come, picking up the towels as quickly
L5-cue_391
as you can, and running into the bathhouse.
L5-cue_392
Then you start to dry yourself, and you find
L5-cue_393
that this towel is a little wet, but it’s drier than you are.
L5-cue_394
You keep drying this one; then you find that one’s too wet—it’s wetting you as much
L5-cue_395
as it’s drying you, and you try another one, and pretty soon you discover a horrible thing:
L5-cue_396
all the towels are damp, and so are you.
L5-cue_397
And as you keep picking them up and putting them down and rearranging them, and there’s no way
L5-cue_398
to get any drier, no matter how many towels—even though you have many towels—because there’s no
L5-cue_399
difference in some sense between the wetness of the towel and the wetness of yourself.
L5-cue_400
I could invent a kind of a quantity which I could call "ease of removing water," or—yes,
L5-cue_401
let’s call it "ease of removing water": the towel has the same "ease
L5-cue_402
of removing water" from it as you have.
L5-cue_403
And so when you touch the towel to you, as much water comes off from the towel to you,
L5-cue_404
as it does from you to the towel.
L5-cue_405
It doesn’t mean there’s the same amount of water in the towel as there is
L5-cue_406
on you-a big towel will have more water in it
L5-cue_407
than a little towel—but they have the same dampness.
L5-cue_408
#When things get to the same dampness, then there’s nothing you can do any longer.
L5-cue_409
Now, the water is like the energy, because the total amount of water isn’t changing.
L5-cue_410
But if we had a world which was limited—see, if the bathhouse door is open,
L5-cue_411
and you can run into the sun and get dried out,
L5-cue_412
or find another towel, you see, okay, that’s different.
L5-cue_413
Then you got saved.
L5-cue_414
But if you have everything closed, and you can’t get away
L5-cue_415
from these towels—you can’t get a new towel—so if you imagine this part of the world
L5-cue_416
that was closed, wait long enough, and, in the accidents of the world, the energy,
L5-cue_417
like the water, will be distributed all over, all of the parts, evenly.
L5-cue_418
#There’s nothing left of one—wayness; there’s nothing left of the real interest
L5-cue_419
of the world as we experience it.
L5-cue_420
Thus, in this situation here, which is a limited one, in which nothing else is supposed
L5-cue_421
to be involved, the temperatures gradually become equal on both sides,
L5-cue_422
and the wheel doesn’t go around either one way or the other.
L5-cue_423
In the same way, the situation is, if you leave a system long enough,
L5-cue_424
it gets the energy thoroughly mixed up in it,
L5-cue_425
and no more energy is really available to do anything.
L5-cue_426
#Incidentally, the thing that corresponds to the dampness is called the temperature.
L5-cue_427
And although when I say two things [are] at the same temperature when things get balanced,
L5-cue_428
it doesn’t mean they have the same energy in them; it just means it’s just as easy
L5-cue_429
to pick energy off of one, as to pick it off the other.
L5-cue_430
So if you put them next to each other, nothing apparently happens: they pass energy back
L5-cue_431
and forth between them; the net result is nothing.
L5-cue_432
When things have become all at the same temperature,
L5-cue_433
then there’s no more energy available to do anything.
L5-cue_434
#The principle of irreversibility is that if things are at a different temperature
L5-cue_435
and are left to themselves, as time goes on, they become more and more
L5-cue_436
at the same temperature, and the availability of energy is perpetually decreasing.
L5-cue_437
This is another name for what’s called the entropy law,
L5-cue_438
which says entropy is always increasing.
L5-cue_439
#But never mind the words; to state it the other way,
L5-cue_440
the availability of energy is always decreasing.
L5-cue_441
That’s a characteristic of the world, in the sense that it’s due to the chaos
L5-cue_442
of molecular irregular motions: things of different temperature, left to themselves,
L5-cue_443
tend to become of the same temperature, but if you have two things at the same temperature,
L5-cue_444
like water on an ordinary stove without a fire,
L5-cue_445
the water isn’t going to freeze and the stove get hot.
L5-cue_446
(But if you have a hot stove with ice, it goes the other way.)
L5-cue_447
The one-wayness is always the loss of the availability of energy.
L5-cue_448
#Well, that’s all I want to say on the subject,
L5-cue_449
but I want to make a few remarks about some characteristics.
L5-cue_450
Here we have an example in which an obvious effect—
L5-cue_451
the irreversibility [of time]—is not an obvious consequence of the laws,
L5-cue_452
but that the effect is rather far from the basic laws.
L5-cue_453
It takes a lot of analysis to understand why this effect, and that the effect is
L5-cue_454
of first importance-in the economy of the world, in the real behavior of the world,
L5-cue_455
in all obvious things, my memory, my characteristics, the difference between past
L5-cue_456
and future, are completely involved in this—and yet the understanding
L5-cue_457
of it is not prima fascia available by knowing about the laws; it takes a lot of analysis.
L5-cue_458
#It is often this way, that the laws of physics are different—the laws
L5-cue_459
of physics do not have a direct obvious relevance to the experience,
L5-cue_460
but that the laws are abstract from the experience to varying degrees.
L5-cue_461
In this particular case, the fact that the laws are reversible,
L5-cue_462
although the phenomena are not, is an example.
L5-cue_463
There are often great distances between the details—the detailed laws—and the main aspects
L5-cue_464
of real phenomena.
L5-cue_465
#For example, it’s something of this kind: that if you watch a glacier from a distance,
L5-cue_466
and you see the big rocks falling into the sea and the way the ice moves and so forth
L5-cue_467
and so on, it isn’t really essential to remember that it’s made
L5-cue_468
out of little hexagonal ice crystals—that the ice crystals are hexagonal—and yet the character
L5-cue_469
of a little hexagonal ice crystal, if understood well enough, is in fact—the consequence
L5-cue_470
of this is, in fact—the motion of the glacier.
L5-cue_471
But it takes quite a while to understand (in fact, nobody knows enough about ice,
L5-cue_472
no matter how much they study the crystal—yet—to really understand) all the behavior
L5-cue_473
of the glacier.
L5-cue_474
#But the hope is that if we do understand the ice crystal,
L5-cue_475
we’ll ultimately understand the glacier.
L5-cue_476
But there’s a large—in fact, although we’ve been talking in these lectures about the fundaments
L5-cue_477
of the physical laws, I must say immediately that one does not,
L5-cue_478
by knowing all the fundamental laws as we know them today, immediately obtain an understanding
L5-cue_479
of anything much: it takes a while, and even then it’s only partial.
L5-cue_480
#Nature, is as a matter of fact, seems to be so designed that the most important things
L5-cue_481
in real world seem to be a kind of complicated accidental result of a lot of laws.
L5-cue_482
To give an example: nuclei, which involve several nuclear particles—protons
L5-cue_483
and neutrons—are very complicated; they have what we call energy levels.
L5-cue_484
They can sit in states or conditions of different energy values.
L5-cue_485
Various nuclei have various energy levels.
L5-cue_486
It’s a complicated mathematical problem, of which we only can partly solve,
L5-cue_487
to find the position of the energy level.
L5-cue_488
#Now, you can understand that it’s complicated, and therefore there’s no particular mystery
L5-cue_489
about the fact that nitrogen with 15 particles inside happens to have a level
L5-cue_490
at 2.4 million volts, and another level at 7.1, and so on; the exact position
L5-cue_491
of the levels is obviously a consequence of an enormous complexity.
L5-cue_492
But the remarkable thing about nature is that the whole universe, in its character,
L5-cue_493
depends upon precisely the position of one particular level in one particular nucleus:
L5-cue_494
in the carbon 12 nucleus there’s a level at 7.82 million volts,
L5-cue_495
it so happens-and that makes all the difference in the world!
L5-cue_496
#The situation is the following: if we start with hydrogen (and it appears that in the beginning,
L5-cue_497
or in the earliest times, the world was practically all hydrogen),
L5-cue_498
then as the hydrogen condenses—comes together under gravity—and gets hotter,
L5-cue_499
nuclear reactions can take place, and it can form helium.
L5-cue_500
And then the helium can combine only partially with the hydrogen
L5-cue_501
and produce a few more elements, a little heavier,
L5-cue_502
but they disintegrate right away back into helium.
L5-cue_503
So it was, for a while, a great mystery about where all the other elements
L5-cue_504
in the world came from, because starting with hydrogen,
L5-cue_505
the "cooking" processes inside the stars would not make much more than helium
L5-cue_506
and a few others—half a dozen others; less, as a matter of fact—other elements.
L5-cue_507
#Faced with this problem, Professor Hoyle said, that there is one way out (I think
L5-cue_508
Edwin Salpeter also—he’s here, so I have to be very careful).
L5-cue_509
If three helium atoms could come together to form carbon, we can easily calculate how often
L5-cue_510
that should happen in the star—and it turned out it should never happen much,
L5-cue_511
except for one possible accident: if there happened to be an energy level
L5-cue_512
at 7.82 million volts in carbon, then the three helium atoms would come together,
L5-cue_513
would stay a little longer than they ought to—[or would] have, on the average,
L5-cue_514
if there were no level there—before they come apart.
L5-cue_515
#Staying there a little longer, there’s enough time for something else to happen,
L5-cue_516
and to make other elements: if there was a level of 7.82 million volts in carbon,
L5-cue_517
then we could understand where all the other elements in the periodic table come from.
L5-cue_518
And so, by a backhanded upside—down argument, it was predicted that there is in carbon a level
L5-cue_519
of 7.82 million volts, and then experiments in the laboratory
L5-cue_520
with carbon show indeed that there is.
L5-cue_521
Therefore, the existence in the world of all these other elements is very closely related
L5-cue_522
to the fact that there is this particular level in carbon.
L5-cue_523
But the position of this particular level in carbon seems to us,
L5-cue_524
after knowing the physical laws, to be a very complicated accident
L5-cue_525
of 12 complicated particles interacting.
L5-cue_526
#So I use to illustrate, by this example, that an understanding
L5-cue_527
of the physical laws doesn’t give an understanding in a sense
L5-cue_528
of understanding significance of the world in any way.
L5-cue_529
The details of real experience are very far, often, from the fundamental laws.
L5-cue_530
There are, in a way of speaking, in the world—we have a way of discussing the world,
L5-cue_531
which you could call—we discuss it at various hierarchies, or levels.
L5-cue_532
Now, I don’t mean to be very precise—there’s a level, there’s another level,
L5-cue_533
and another level—but I will indicate by describing a set of ideas to you,
L5-cue_534
just one after the other, what I mean by hierarchies of ideas.
L5-cue_535
#For example, at one end, we have the fundamental laws of physics.
L5-cue_536
Then we invent other terms for concepts which are approximate, which have, we believe,
L5-cue_537
the ultimate explanation in terms of the fundamental laws.
L5-cue_538
For instance, "heat"—heat is supposed to be the jiggling, and it’s just a word
L5-cue_539
for a hot thing—it is just a word for a mass of atoms which are jiggling.
L5-cue_540
For all that, fundamentally, we should think of the atoms jiggling.
L5-cue_541
But for a while, if we’re talking about heat, we sometimes forget about the atoms jiggling,
L5-cue_542
just like when we talk about the glacier, we don’t always think of the hexagonal ice,
L5-cue_543
the snowflakes which originally fell.
L5-cue_544
Another example of the same thing is a "salt crystal": looked at fundamentally,
L5-cue_545
it’s a lot of protons, neutrons, and electrons.
L5-cue_546
But we have this concept of "salt crystal,"
L5-cue_547
which carries a whole pattern already of fundamental interactions.
L5-cue_548
Or [an] idea like pressure.
L5-cue_549
#Now, if we go higher up from this, in another level, we have properties of substances
L5-cue_550
like "refractive index"-how light is bent when it goes through something.
L5-cue_551
Or "surface tension"-the fact that the water tends
L5-cue_552
to pull itself together—is described by a number.
L5-cue_553
I remind you, that we have to go through several laws down to find out that it’s the pull
L5-cue_554
of the atoms and so on, but we still say "surface tension," and don’t worry
L5-cue_555
when we’re discussing surface tension of the inner workings,
L5-cue_556
always-sometimes we do; sometimes we don’t.
L5-cue_557
Go on up in the hierarchy.
L5-cue_558
With the water we have the waves, and we have a thing like a storm.
L5-cue_559
We have a word "storm," which represents an enormous mass of phenomena.
L5-cue_560
Or "sunspot."
L5-cue_561
Or "star," which is an accumulation of things,
L5-cue_562
and it’s not worthwhile, always, to think of it way back.
L5-cue_563
#In fact we can’t, because the higher up we go, we have too many steps in between,
L5-cue_564
each one of which is a little weak, and we haven’t thought them all through yet.
L5-cue_565
We go up in this hierarchy of complexity, we get the things like "frog," or "nerve impulse,"
L5-cue_566
which, you see, is an enormously complicated thing in the physical world,
L5-cue_567
involving an organization of matter in a very elaborate complexity.
L5-cue_568
Then we go on, and we come to things—words and concepts like "man," and "history,"
L5-cue_569
or "political expediency," and so forth—which is a series of concepts that we use
L5-cue_570
to understand things at an ever higher level.
L5-cue_571
Going on, we come to things like "evil," and "beauty," and "hope."
L5-cue_572
#Now, which end is nearer to the ultimate creator, or the ultimate—or,
L5-cue_573
I make a religious metaphor, which end is nearer to God?
L5-cue_574
"Beauty" and "hope," or the fundamental laws?
L5-cue_575
I think that the right way, of course, is to say that the whole structural interconnections
L5-cue_576
of the thing is the thing that we have to look at, that the sequence of hierarchies,
L5-cue_577
all the sciences and all the efforts—not just the sciences, but all the efforts
L5-cue_578
of an intellectual kind—are to see the connections of the hierarchies,
L5-cue_579
is to connect beauty to history, is to connect history to man’s psychology,
L5-cue_580
the man’s psychology to the working of the brain, the brain to the neural impulse,
L5-cue_581
the neural impulse to the chemistry, and so forth—up and down, both ways.
L5-cue_582
Today, we cannot—and there’s no use making believe we can—draw carefully a line all the way
L5-cue_583
from one end of this thing to the other; in fact, we’ve just begun to see
L5-cue_584
that there is this relative hierarchy.
L5-cue_585
And so I don’t think either end is nearer to God.
L5-cue_586
#To stand at either end and to walk out off the end of the pier only,
L5-cue_587
hoping out in that direction is the complete understanding, is a mistake.
L5-cue_588
To stand with evil and beauty and hope, or to stand with the fundamental laws,
L5-cue_589
hoping that way to get a deep understanding of the whole world
L5-cue_590
with that aspect alone, is a mistake.
L5-cue_591
It is not sensible either for the ones who specialize at one end,
L5-cue_592
and the ones who specialize at the other end, to have such disregard for each other.
L5-cue_593
(They don’t, actually, but the people say they do.)
L5-cue_594
#But that actually, the great mass of workers in between, connecting one step to another,
L5-cue_595
are improving all the time our understanding of the world—both from working
L5-cue_596
at the ends, and working in the middle.
L5-cue_597
In that way, we are gradually understanding this connection,
L5-cue_598
this tremendous world of interconnecting hierarchies.
L5-cue_599
#Thank you.